Notes on Growing Tomatoes

Obtain seeds for the variety of tomatoes that you wish to grow. There are hundreds, they come in all colors, sizes, and flavors. Do something interesting -- don't just buy some random seedlings from Lowes! 

Starting seeds: Seeds should be started indoors about 6 weeks before they can be transplated outside (a week or two after the average date of last frost). In Orange County, you can put them out as early as mid-March, although they will grow slowly until it starts to warm up. Seeds should be sown in seed-starting soil at 1/4 to 1/2 inch deep; sow two seeds per cell. Ideally, you should keep the seeds between 75 to 80 degrees F to speed emergence, which should take 5 to 10 days. Lower temps than this will delay emergence. Keep the soil evenly moist. After the seeds get their first set of ``true'' leaves, fertilize with a liquid fertilizer that has a high proportion of phosphorous (compared to potassium and nitrogen). After they get their second set of true leaves, be sure to repot them into pots that are at least 3 inches in diameter. Continue to fertilize every 2 weeks until transplating. Be sure to give the seedlings plenty of light after emergence, or you will have gangly or ``leggy'' plants that will struggle outside.

Transplating notes: Before transplanting, be sure to harden off your seedlings. Hardening off consists of slowly reducing water and acclimating the seedlings to outdoor temperature swings. About two weeks before outside transplating, allow the soil to become dry enough to slightly wilt your seedlings (be careful not to wilt them too much!) before watering. Do this once or twice before translating. About one week before transplanting, put your seedlings outside during a morning chill for about an hour, then bring them back inside. Do this for one additional hour each time until day 5 when you can leave them out all day and all night. (This will build their cold tolerance slowly.) Transplant by digging a hole about twice the width of their container and 2 to 3 times the depth. Add some well-composted manure to the bottom of the hole and mix with a little soil. Put the seedlings in the hole and bury up to 2/3 of the stem of the plant (plants will sprout roots wherever they are under the ground). If you are using plastic pots, try not to disturb the roots. I've found that Cow Pots work the best because you can bury the entire pot which breaks down very quickly. 

Training vines: Decide first whether you want to (1) have plants grow along the ground untrained, (2) train the plants using a cage, or (3) train vines using ties. 
1. Tomates are vines and indeterminate varieties will continue to grow along the ground without training. Commercial tomato-growing operations use this method for canning tomatoes. Be aware though that vines and fruit that lie against wet ground will be subject to rot and disease (septoria wilt, early blight, late blight), especially if watered from above. 
2. Tomato cages are one form of training vines. Be sure to get a large cage for indeterminate varieties, don't bother with a small one. Be sure to ssupport the cage with wooden stakes, it will eventually get too heavy to support the plant's weight. Train the vines by folding them inside the cage whenever they attempt to escape. Once the vines reach the top of the cage, start to prune the vines back to keep them inside. You'll need to rather aggressively prune them to keep them in. 
3. I've used two methods in the past to train tomatoes by tying. For both cases, be sure to select ties that will be strong, but also not cut into the flesh of the vine (no unprotected wire). I would steer away from twine, as it breaks down quickly and will fall apart before the end of the season. 
Method 1: staking. Select a stake that is 5 to 6 tall and drive it into the ground at least a foot, no more than 8 inches away from the base of your seedling. Start by tying a young seedling up to the stake as soon as you can manipulate the plant over without injuring it. (Never force a vine!) Tie frequently, supporting the weight of the plant with several ties. When you tie, you need to prune back ``suckers'' or vines that start in the crook of leave stems and the main stem. Pinch these off with your finger nails or use a sharp set of pruners. Continue to train the vine upwards. You'll need to stay on top of pruning with this method, or it becomes a mess! Aggressively prune the top, avoiding taking off flowers. 
Method 2: the Florida weave. This method uses fewer stakes but more ties, which you'll weave in between plants. Put two plants in line in between each set of stakes. Use ties to weave in between plants and tie them off using the stakes. As the plants grow, add additional ties which will support the plants. Prune suckers that are long enough to reach the ground. 

Watering tomato plants: Tomato vines are very susceptible to fungal and bacterial disease which thrive in wet conditions. Be sure to let the soil in the first 1 or 2 inches from the surface dry before watering. Don't let the plant wilt, that will slow growth, but err on the side of underwatering. Use only a drip system that will not splash the plant's leaves, this will spread and encourage the growth of disease! 

Dealing with disease: You'll likely see some diseased leaves on your plant at some point. It's important to prune these leaves off with a sharp pruner or scissors and dispose of them in your yard waste. (DO NOT COMPOST or leave the leaves to break down, this will spread disease!) Sterilize your pruners between plants with 70% isopropyl alcohol to prevent accidental spread. 



